TLS Reference guide grammar check and review (#42511)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/tls-registry-reference.adoc

:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-tls-registry

The TLS registry is a Quarkus extension centralizing the TLS configuration for the application.

> It allows you to define the TLS configuration in one place and reference it from multiple places in the application.

Reviewer: In _IBM Style_, the "Anthropomorphism" guideline suggests refocusing on the user:

> Do not assign human characteristics to inanimate objects, which are incapable of human behaviors and emotions. As much as possible, focus technical information on users and their actions, not on a product and its actions. See specific guidance for Marketing.
> 
> - [Avoid] Product focus: The Delivery Information window allows you to specify the name of the sender.
> - [Prefer] User focus: In the Delivery Information window, specify the name of the sender. "

```suggestion
You can use the TLS registry to define the configuration in one place and reference it from multiple places in the application.
```

Reviewer: In _IBM Style_, also see:
> allow verb
> Avoid stating that inanimate objects grant abilities to people, as in “the product allows you to…”. Whenever possible, use a direct,
> user-focused alternative such as “you can use the product to…” or “with this product, users can…”.

> The TLS extension should be automatically added to your project when you use a compatible extension.

Reviewer 2: > To avoid using "should be", can we be more explicit and say that it IS added to your project?

Agreed.

For example, if your application uses Quarkus REST, gRPC, or reactive routes, the TLS registry is automatically added to your project.

== Using TLS registry

To configure a TLS connection, including key and trust stores, use the `quarkus.tls.*` properties.

> Configuration directly under `quarkus.tls` is the default configuration used by all the TLS connections in the application.

Reviewer 2: How about something like this?

The configuration model always contains a default (unnamed) TLS configuration that is configured by properties directly under `quarkus.tls.*`. In addition, it allows you to define separate named configurations, these use `quarkus.tls.<name>.*` properties.

> Configuration directly under `quarkus.tls` is the default configuration used by all the TLS connections in the application.

Author: Applied.

Configuring TLS is mainly about key stores and trust stores.
The configuration depends on the format (`pem`, `p12`, `jks`...).
There are other important properties, too.
This section details the various properties you can use to configure TLS.

=== Key stores

Key stores are used to store the private key and the certificate.
They are mainly used on the server side but can also be used on the client side when mTLS is used.

==== PEM key stores

> PEM key stores are composed of a list of pairs of two files: the certificate and the private key.

Reviewer 2: I've lived until now without knowing what PEM actually means. But yes, maybe we can do that :)

quarkus.tls.key-store.sni=true # Disabled by default
----

With this setting enabled, the client indicates the server name during the TLS handshake, allowing the server to select the right certificate:

> * When configuring the keystore with PEM files, multiple CRT or Key must be given.

Author: Update:

```
With this setting enabled, the client indicates the server name during the TLS handshake, allowing the server to select the appropriate certificate:

* When configuring the keystore with PEM files, multiple certificate (CRT) and key files must be provided.
CRT is a common file extension for X.509 certificate files, typically in PEM (Privacy-Enhanced Mail) format.
These files contain the public certificate.
* When configuring the keystore with a JKS or P12 file, the server selects one alias based on the SNI hostname.
In this case, all keystore and alias passwords must be identical, and there is no need to set the alias property.
```

Is this better now @jmartisk @sheilamjones ?

> * When configuring the keystore with PEM files, multiple CRT or Key must be given.

Reviewer 3: LGTM @MichalMaler. 
Just a small thing, I checked online and there isn't a hyphen in the term "Privacy Enhanced Mail". 
Also, should it be spelled in full in the first sentence instead of the second, that is, in the sentence  "When configuring the keystore with Privacy Enhance Mail (PEM) files......."

quarkus.tls.key-store.sni=true # Disabled by default
----

With this setting enabled, the client indicates the server name during the TLS handshake, allowing the server to select the appropriate certificate:

> * When configuring the keystore with PEM files, multiple certificate (CRT) and key files must be provided.

Reviewer 2: It's not clear to me how the server picks the certificate in this case (for JKS/P12 it says that the server selects one alias based on the SNI hostname, but how does it work here?). I'm not that familiar with it, it may need @sberyozkin or @cescoffier

Reviewer 4: It selects the rights certificates/private key based on the host of the request. It then matches with the common name (CN - Deprecated but still widely used)  or the SAN (subject alternative names, heavily recommended) configured in the certificate.

=== Trust stores

Trust stores are used to store the certificates of the trusted parties.

> They are generally used on the client and server sides when mTLS is used.

Reviewer 2: With regular TLS, a truststore is used only by the client (and uses that to authenticate the server). With mTLS (mutual TLS), truststores are used both by the server and the client (and both parties use them to authenticate each other).

> They are generally used on the client and server sides when mTLS is used.

Author: @jmartisk So, should I keep it as I wrote it or you would prefer to add some information to it? THX!

> They are generally used on the client and server sides when mTLS is used.

Reviewer 2: I'd use the text from my previous comment, maybe adjust it as you see fit :)

> They are generally used on the client and server sides when mTLS is used.

Author: Great, applying to my next commit and resolving this conversation :)

The TLS protocol versions are the list of protocols that can be used during the TLS handshake.

> You can configure the ordered list of enabled TLS protocols.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enabled TLS protocol versions are specified as an ordered list separated by commas. The relevant configuration property is `quarkus.tls.protocols` (or `quarkus.tls.<name>.protocols` for named TLS configurations).
```

> It defaults to `TLSv1.3`, `TLSv1.2` if not configured.

Author: Great, will do. Thanks @jmartisk

> Are supported: `TLSv1`, `TLSv1.1`, `TLSv1.2`, `TLSv1.3`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The supported values are: `TLSv1`, `TLSv1.1`, `TLSv1.2`, `TLSv1.3`.
```

While extensions will automatically use the TLS registry, you can also use the registry API to access the TLS configuration programmatically.

> To access the TLS configuration, inject the `TlsConfigurationRegistry` bean and get the TLS configuration by name (or the default one):

Author: Update:

```
While extensions automatically use the TLS registry, you can also access the TLS configuration programmatically through the registry API.

To access the TLS configuration, inject the TlsConfigurationRegistry bean.
You can retrieve the TLS configuration by specifying its name or, if no name is provided, the default configuration will be used.
```

> To access the TLS configuration, inject the `TlsConfigurationRegistry` bean and get the TLS configuration by name (or the default one):

Author: is it better @jmartisk @sheilamjones ?

== The registry API

While extensions automatically use the TLS registry, you can also access the TLS configuration programmatically through the registry API.

To access the TLS configuration, inject the `TlsConfigurationRegistry` bean.

> You can retrieve the TLS configuration by specifying its name or, if no name is provided, the default configuration will be used.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can retrieve a named TLS configuration by calling `get("<NAME>")` or the default configuration by calling `getDefault()`.
```

----

Remember that the impacted server and client may need to listen to the `CertificateReloadedEvent` to apply the new certificates.

> If enabled, this is automatically done for the Quarkus HTTP server, including the management interface.

Author: Yeah, I think you are right here again. What about this?

```
This is automatically done for the Quarkus HTTP server, and for the management interface if it is enabled.
```
Betta? @jmartisk @sheilamjones

> If enabled, this is automatically done for the Quarkus HTTP server, including the management interface.

Reviewer 2: Just a little note that the management interface technically also is HTTP-based, so I rather like the original version with "including". Your version treats them as very separate things, but they are just two endpoints of the same server

> If enabled, this is automatically done for the Quarkus HTTP server, including the management interface.

Author: Good. Applying.

  type: ClusterIP
----

The annotation `service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name` instructs OpenShift to generate a certificate and store it in a secret named `my-tls-secret`.

To use the stored certificated:

. Add this annotation to your already running service:
+
[source, shell]
----
oc annotate service hero-service \
     service.beta.openshift.io/serving-cert-secret-name=my-tls-secret
----

> . Mount the secret in your pod by updating your _Deployment_ configuration to include a volume and mount the secret:

Author: @jmartisk Jan, WDYT?

> . Mount the secret in your pod by updating your _Deployment_ configuration to include a volume and mount the secret:

Reviewer 2: How about
```
. Mount the secret as a volume in your pod by updating your _Deployment_ configuration:
```

> . Mount the secret in your pod by updating your _Deployment_ configuration to include a volume and mount the secret:

Author: Applying, resolving, thanks giving! :D

<2> Set up the key store with the paths to the certificate and private key. This can be configured using environment variables or configuration files. Here, we use environment variables. OpenShift serving certificates always create the `tls.crt` and `tls.key` files.
<3> Mount the secret in the container. Ensure the path matches the one used in the configuration (here `/etc/tls`).
<4> Configure the port to serve HTTPS.
+
NOTE: By setting the `quarkus.tls.key-store.pem.acme.cert` and `quarkus.tls.key-store.pem.acme.key` variables (or their environment variable variant as done above), the TLS registry will use the certificate and private key from the secret.
This configures the default key store for the Quarkus HTTP server, allowing it to use the certificate.
For using this certificate in a named configuration, refer to <<referencing-a-tls-configuration>>.

. Deploy your application to use the certificate generated by OpenShift.
This will make the service available over HTTPS.

=== Trusting the Certificate Authority (CA)

Now that your service uses a certificate issued by OpenShift, configure your client applications to trust this certificate.

> Accomplish this by creating a _ConfigMap_ that holds the CA certificate and mounts it in the application's pod.

Author: Update:
```
To do so, create a ConfigMap that holds the CA certificate, and then configure the pod to mount it.
```
Better @jmartisk @sheilamjones ?

I think that ConfigMap is just a simple a way to store configuration data as key-value pairs that can be made available to pods. User are those that need to mount it, right?

> Accomplish this by creating a _ConfigMap_ that holds the CA certificate and mounts it in the application's pod.

Reviewer 5: The suggestion above seems fine as I'm not sure technically it is a ConfigMap that performs the mounting, instead, the mounting need to be performed for a config map entry to resolve. 

However, let's wait till Clement reviews all the changes

> Accomplish this by creating a _ConfigMap_ that holds the CA certificate and mounts it in the application's pod.

Author: Yeah, I think my latest version mentioned here is correct, but need a verification :) Thank you for your opinion, @sberyozkin !

> Accomplish this by creating a _ConfigMap_ that holds the CA certificate and mounts it in the application's pod.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, it's not the ConfigMap that mounts it.

> To do so, create a ConfigMap that holds the CA certificate, and then configure the pod to mount it.

Sounds correct to me

> Accomplish this by creating a _ConfigMap_ that holds the CA certificate and mounts it in the application's pod.

Author: Great. Applying, closing.

https://letsencrypt.org[Let's Encrypt] is a free, automated certificate authority provided by https://www.abetterinternet.org/[Internet Security Research Group].

Let's Encrypt uses https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8555[Automated certificate management environment (ACME) protocol] to support automatic certificate issuance and renewal.
Please read https://letsencrypt.org/docs/[Let's Encrypt documentation] to learn more about Let's Encrypt and ACME.

The TLS registry project allows a CLI ACME client to issue and renew Let's Encrypt certificates.

> Your application uses a TLS registry to resolve ACME protocol challenges.

Author: You are right in your suggestion. However, multi TLS registry is possible (when different parts of an application or different environments require separate TLS configurations. ), even thought not that common.
I was wondering why there is no article for that TLS registry; thought that `a` is easier to drop off :)

> Your application uses a TLS registry to resolve ACME protocol challenges.

Reviewer 2: I think `TLS registry`  in this context refers to the TLS registry extension, so I'd say it's a task of the `TLS Registry extension` to communicate over the ACME protocol.
And rather say "extension" than "project"

> Your application uses a TLS registry to resolve ACME protocol challenges.

Author: Applying this:

```
The TLS registry extension allows a CLI ACME client to issue and renew Let's Encrypt certificates.
Your application uses this TLS registry extension to resolve ACME protocol challenges.
```

----
<1> Set your domain name.
<2> Provide your contact email address that Let's Encrypt can use to contact you in case of any issues with your Let's Encrypt account.

> <3> Set your application management URL, which can be used to handle ACME challenges. Use `https://localhost:8443/` if you choose not to enable a management router in the <<lets-encrypt-prerequisites>> step.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<3> Set your application management URL, which you can use to handle ACME challenges. 
Use `https://localhost:8443/` if you choose not to enable a management router in the <<lets-encrypt-prerequisites>> step.
```

> During this command, the TLS registry CLI performs the following tasks:

Reviewer 3: Style suggestion: Maybe say "During the processing of the `issue-certificate` command ......"

During this command, TLS registry CLI reads a Let's Encrypt account information recorded during the <<lets-encrypt-issue-certificate>> step, issues a Let's Encrypt certificate request, and communicates with a Quarkus application to have ACME challenges resolved.

Once the Let's Encrypt certificate chain and private key have been successfully renewed, they are converted to PEM format and copied to your application's `.letsencrypt` folder.

> The TLS registry is informed that a new certificate and private key are ready and that they are reloaded automatically.

Reviewer 3: Question: Think the updated text slightly alters the meaning. The original sentence states that the TLS registry **reloads** the new cert and private automatically, whereas your update states that the TLS registry **is informed** that they are reloaded (and not who does the reloading).

Author: @jmartisk WDYT, Jan?

Reviewer 2: It should be that the TLS registry performs the 'reload'.

Author: Great.

Applying:
```
The TLS registry is notified when a new certificate and private key are ready, and it automatically reloads them.
```

[[lets-encrypt-ngrok]]

> === Use NGrok for testing

Author: Will read in to this! Thank you @sheilamjones !

https://ngrok.com/[Ngrok] can be used to provide a secure HTTPS tunnel to your application running on localhost, and make it easy to test HTTPS based applications.

> Using Ngrok provides the easiest option to get started with the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature.

Reviewer 3: Question/suggestion: Can we say something is the "easiest" option as it rather subjective? Could we be more direct and say "Using ngrok, you can get started with the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature."  or "ngrok provides a simplified way of getting started with the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature."

The first thing you have to do with Ngrok is to ask it to reserve a domain.
You can use https://github.com/quarkiverse/quarkus-ngrok[Quarkiverse NGrok] in dev mode or reserve it directly in the NGrok dashboard.

> Unfortunately, you can't use your NGrok domain to test the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature immediately.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, you cannot use your ngrok domain to test the Quarkus Let's Encrypt ACME feature immediately.
```

This is because Ngrok is using Let's Encrypt and intercepts ACME challenges that are meant to be handled by the Quarkus application instead.

> Therefore, remove the NGrok Let's Encrypt certificate policy from your NGrok domain:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, remove the ngrok Let's Encrypt certificate policy from your ngrok domain:
```

`YOUR-RESERVED-DOMAIN-ID` is your reserved domain's id which starts from `rd_`, you can find it in the https://dashboard.ngrok.com/cloud-edge/domains[NGrok dashboard domains section].

> Now, because NGrok now only forwards ACME challenges over HTTP, start NGrok like follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now, because ngrok only forwards ACME challenges over HTTP, start ngrok as follows:
```
